Add doc on HTTP gateways (#3066)
dfinity/portal: docs/developer-docs/smart-contracts/advanced-features/http-gateways.mdx

---
keywords: [advanced, tutorial, http, http gateways, gateways]
---

import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";

> # HTTP gateways

Author: This is meant to be a high level overview of HTTP gateways, and may include how to run a remote gateway in a future iteration, so the title should remain general rather than specific.

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Advanced", "Tutorial"]} />

## Overview

The ICP HTTP gateway protocol enables conventional HTTP clients to interact with the ICP network. Through the HTTP gateway, software such as web browsers can retrieve and digest canister code and assets, such as HTML, JavaScript, images, or videos. The HTTP gateway makes this workflow possible by translating standard HTTP requests into API canister calls that ICP can understand.

> There are several HTTP gateway nodes running on ICP, but it should be noted that an HTTP gateway node could become compromised, creating a threat for canisters. Compromised gateways are threats even for canisters that are considered 'secure', such that they use certify assets, use a default client, and do not maintain their own certification checking.

Reviewer: I find the last sentence really confusing; "use certify assets"? Who uses a default client? Who doesn't maintain certification checking? 

Also, a compromised gateway doesn't threaten canisters IMO, it threatens the users using a conventional HTTP client.

> There are several HTTP gateway nodes running on ICP, but it should be noted that an HTTP gateway node could become compromised, creating a threat for canisters. Compromised gateways are threats even for canisters that are considered 'secure', such that they use certify assets, use a default client, and do not maintain their own certification checking.

Author: Revising to:

```
The ICP HTTP gateway protocol enables conventional HTTP clients to interact with the ICP network. HTTP gateways run adjacent to ICP and provide a connect used by software such as web browsers to retrieve and digest canister code and assets, such as HTML, JavaScript, images, or videos. The HTTP gateway makes this workflow possible by translating standard HTTP requests into API canister calls that ICP can understand.

There are several HTTP gateway instances maintained for ICP, but it should be noted that an HTTP gateway is a centralized component that could become compromised, creating a threat for users receiving HTTP content. Compromised gateways are threats even for canisters that are considered 'secure', such that they use certify assets, use a default client, and do not maintain their own certification checking.

DFINITY exclusively controls the HTTP gateways that serve canisters on `ic0.app` and `icp0.io`. Developers can then also configure their own [custom domains](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/web-apps/custom-domains/using-custom-domains) to point at the DFINITY controlled HTTP gateways.

Alternatively, developers can run their own HTTP gateways on their custom domains instead of using the DFINITY controlled gateways, but this is not well supported yet. 
```

For a more secure solution, it is possible to run your own HTTP gateway instance locally.

### Terminology

- **Request**: A message sent to a server or endpoint.

> - **Client**: A service that is able to send an HTTP formatted request and receive a response from a server.

Reviewer: We seem to say "HTTP client" elsewhere in the text.

Author: Each term defined here is referenced with `HTTP` throughout the doc. We could include `HTTP` in each definition, but it may feel redundant.

- **Gateway**: Enables the transfer of inbound and outbound messages.

## HTTP gateway workflow

On ICP, an HTTP request is handled by an HTTP client using the following workflow:

1. An HTTP client makes an outbound request.

2. The HTTP gateway intercepts the request and resolves the canister ID of the request's destination.

3. The request is encoded with Candid and sent in a query call to the destination canister's `http_request` method.

> 4. ICP's API gateway intercepts this request, resolves the canister ID based on the hostname address, and then forwards the request to the relevant replica node. All requests made to ICP through an HTTP gateway are forwarded through this API gateway.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. This request is sent to an ICP API boundary node, which will then forward the request to a replica node on the relevant subnet.
```

> 4. ICP's API gateway intercepts this request, resolves the canister ID based on the hostname address, and then forwards the request to the relevant replica node. All requests made to ICP through an HTTP gateway are forwarded through this API gateway.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @nathanosdev that such detail is not needed: I would just omit this step.

5. The canister receives and processes the request, then returns the response.

> 6. The HTTP gateway decodes the Candid encoding on the response and sends the request again via an update call to the canister's `http_request_update` method. The update call goes through consensus on the subnet.

Reviewer 3: The update call to `http_request_update` is only sent if the canister requests it. I'd propose seprating this into a sub-step to emphasize that it's an optional, alternative flow.

Author: Separated into sub step

> 7. If necessary, the HTTP gateway fetches additional response body data through query calls.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
7. If the response size [exceeds the maximum response size](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/maintain/resource-limits/), the HTTP gateway fetches additional response body data through query calls.
```

8. The HTTP gateway validates the response's certificate, if applicable.

9. The HTTP gateway returns the decoded response to the HTTP client.

Additional details can be found in the [HTTP gateway specification](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/http-gateway-protocol-spec).

> ## Running a local HTTP gateway

Reviewer 3: There's no need to build this proxy manually. There are some links to download and install it in the repo, I've just added a new "Installation" section now to make it more obvious: https://github.com/dfinity/http-proxy?tab=readme-ov-file#installation

Author: Included these instructions

Reviewer 3: I'd suggest removing the manual instructions entirely. Otherwise we need to maintain the same instructions in two different places and they'll easily get outdated.

Author: Removed manual instructions

To run your own local HTTP gateway, a proof-of-concept implementation can be used that enables a secure end-to-end connection with canisters deployed on ICP.

This implementation features:

- Translation between HTTP asset requests and ICP API calls.

- Detects ICP domains from principals and custom domain records.

- Terminates TLS connections locally.

> - Bypasses remote gateway denylists.

Reviewer 2: Do we really want to advertise this?

Reviewer 3: We also advertise it on the [http-proxy](https://github.com/dfinity/http-proxy/) docs.

I think it's important for the community to know. There've been more than a few instances of someone complaining about the boundary node deny lists on the forum. I think they should know that the answer is to run their own, local gateway.

- Resolves crypto domains.

### Prerequisites

- Download and install [yarn package manger](https://yarnpkg.com/).

- Download and install [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en).

- #### Step 1: Clone the GitHub repo:

```
git clone https://github.com/dfinity/http-proxy.git
```

- #### Step 2: Install the project's dependencies:

```
cd http-proxy
npm install --global yarn
yarn set version 3.5.0
yarn install
```

- #### Step 3: Build and run the project:

```
yarn build
yarn start
```

You should see output that indicates the local HTTP gateway is ready to use:

```
{"level":30, "time": "2024-06-13T22:41:28.962Z","pid":41696,"hostname":"JessieMgeonsMBP.attlocal.net","name":"IC HTTP Proxy UI","msg":"Preparing interface"}
{"level":30, "time": "2024-06-13T22:41:28.981Z","pid":41696,"hostname":"JessieMgeonsMBP.attlocal.net","name":"IC HTTP Proxy UI","msg":"Interface is ready"}

> ```

Reviewer: Let's show how to use this gateway now, and let's enable the user to see that it works. E.g., what port is it running on? Something like a `curl` command to demonstrate that something is happening (like fetching an HTTP point of the frontend dapp, or something similar - ideally some URL that stays stable, maybe just '/')

Author: Could you provide some commands on how to achieve that?

Author: Followed up on slack

---
keywords: [advanced, tutorial, http, http gateways, gateways]
---

import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";

# HTTP gateways

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Advanced", "Tutorial"]} />

## Overview

> The ICP HTTP gateway protocol enables conventional HTTP clients to interact with the ICP network. HTTP gateways run adjacent to ICP and provide a connection used by software such as web browsers send and receive standard HTTP requests and responses, including static assets, such as HTML, JavaScript, images, or videos. The HTTP gateway makes this workflow possible by translating standard HTTP requests into API canister calls that ICP canisters can understand and vice versa for HTTP responses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ICP HTTP gateway protocol enables conventional HTTP clients to interact with the ICP network. HTTP gateways run adjacent to ICP and provide a connection used by software such as web browsers to send and receive standard HTTP requests and responses, including static assets, such as HTML, JavaScript, images, or videos. The HTTP gateway makes this workflow possible by translating standard HTTP requests into API canister calls that ICP canisters can understand and vice versa for HTTP responses.
```

> There are several HTTP gateway instances maintained for ICP, but it should be noted that an HTTP gateway is a centralized component that could become compromised, creating a threat for users receiving HTTP content. Compromised gateways are threats even for canisters that are considered 'secure', such that they use certify assets, use a default client, and do not maintain their own certification checking.

Reviewer: This last sentence is the same as before, no? I still find it confusing... I also still think it's misleading to say that gateways are a threat to canisters; they can't influence how the canister behaves. They are a threat to the user though, as they can misrepresent the canister state, potentially forge user commands etc.

Author: Not sure what happened to the commit to remove this sentence, but I've re-commited it. This sentence should be removed now.
